[Feynman’s Maze-Running Story · Gwern.net](https://gwern.net/maze)

The article investigates what research Feynman$_{1974}$ referred to in the anecdote:
> …Other kinds of errors are more characteristic of poor science. [When I was at](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Feynman#Cornell) [Cornell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cornell_University) [1945–1950], I often talked to the people in the psychology department.[1⁠](#sn1) One of the students told me she wanted to do an experiment that went something like this—I don’t remember it in detail, but it had been found by others that under certain circumstances, _X_, rats did something, _A_. She was curious as to whether, if she changed the circumstances to _Y_, they would still do, _A_. So her proposal was to do the experiment under circumstances _Y_ and see if they still did _A_. I explained to her that it was necessary first to repeat in her laboratory the experiment of the other person—to do it under condition _X_ to see if she could also get result _A_—and then change to _Y_ and see if _A_ changed. Then she would know that the real difference was the thing she thought she had under control. She was very delighted with this new idea, and went to her professor. And his reply was, no, you cannot do that, because the experiment has already been done and you would be wasting time. This was in about 1935 or so, and it seems to have been the general policy then to not try to repeat psychological experiments, but only to change the conditions and see what happens.
>
> …[Not] All experiments in psychology are of this type, however. For example, there have been many experiments running rats through all kinds of mazes, and so on—with little clear result. But in 1937 a man named Young did a very interesting one. He had a long corridor with doors all along one side where the rats came in, and doors along the other side where the food was. He wanted to see if he could train the rats to go in at the third door down from wherever he started them off. No. The rats went immediately to the door where the food had been the time before.
>
> The question was, how did the rats know, because the corridor was so beautifully built and so uniform, that this was the same door as before? Obviously there was something about the door that was different from the other doors. So he painted the doors very carefully, arranging the textures on the faces of the doors exactly the same. Still the rats could tell. Then he thought maybe the rats were smelling the food, so he used chemicals to change the smell after each run. Still the rats could tell. Then he realized the rats might be able to tell by seeing the lights and the arrangement in the laboratory like any commonsense person. So he covered the corridor, and, still the rats could tell.
>
> He finally found that they could tell by the way the floor sounded when they ran over it. And he could only fix that by putting his corridor in sand. So he covered one after another of all possible clues and finally was able to fool the rats so that they had to learn to go in the third door. If he relaxed any of his conditions, the rats could tell.
>
> Now, from a scientific standpoint, that is an A-Number-1 experiment. That is the experiment that makes rat-running experiments sensible, because it uncovers the clues that the rat is really using—not what you think it’s using. And that is the experiment that tells exactly what conditions you have to use in order to be careful and control everything in an experiment with rat-running.
>
> I looked into the subsequent history of this research. The subsequent experiment, and the one after that, never referred to Mr. Young. They never used any of his criteria of putting the corridor on sand, or being very careful. They just went right on running rats in the same old way, and paid no attention to the great discoveries of Mr. Young, and his papers are not referred to, because he didn’t discover anything about the rats. In fact, he discovered _all_ the things you have to do to discover something about rats. But not paying attention to experiments like that is a characteristic of Cargo Cult Science.
