---
title: "Your Book Review: Are We Smart Enough To Know How Smart Animals Are?"
---
#psychology #ethology #book-review
[Your Book Review: Are We Smart Enough To Know How Smart Animals Are?](https://www.astralcodexten.com/p/your-book-review-are-we-smart-enough)

>_Are We Smart Enough to Know How Smart Animals Are_ is ostensibly a book about a subfield of ethology - animal cognition.

>In the past, some humans have certainly been overly ready to attribute human thoughts, feelings, and experiences to animals \[...], but for much of the twentieth century, many biologists went too far and would deny _any_ human-like characteristics to animals, reaching an extreme by importing Skinnerian "black box" thinking that denied any speculation about the mental or emotional life of animals. De Waal argues that both anthropomorphization and "anthropodenial" (the rejection of any shared mental or emotional traits between humans and animals) have led to missed opportunities for observation, experiment and study.

>One area where De Waal is especially skeptical about both claims of human-like ability as well as how much those claims matter is the evidence around "language use" among other animals. He doesn't claim that there isn't evidence for other animals doing very well with bits and pieces of language - African Gray Parrots really do seem to learn the names for lots of objects, captive Chimpanzees who participate in a lot of experiments learn to understand spoken instructions rather well, and some chimps and gorillas have certainly learned some amount of sign language. Instead, De Waal's skepticism comes from his belief that a) the cluster of cognitive skills we call "language" isn't central to cognition generally, and b) it's ridiculous to assume that animals that didn't evolve this ability on their own would be able to do much with it (if anything, it's remarkable how much they _can_ do). Very interesting for his interpretation here is that De Waal says that he is apparently [one of those people who don't primarily think with an inner monologue](http://esr.ibiblio.org/?p=8558) \[...].

>De Waal closes by acknowledging that the field has come around and these days, with animal cognition a respected field and the assumption of evolutionary continuity it rests on widely accepted. \[...] Predictably, the fields that have longest held onto the very old human/animal dichotomy, with the accompanying belief that "evolution stops at the neck", are those concerned with humans and the furthest away from biology: the humanities\[...]. Even folks you would not expect show occasional flashes of emotionally-motivated human exceptionalism, like the primate research team that learned a chimpanzee in Japan performed significantly better than humans on a specific memory-related task and responded by training to beat the chimp as hard as they could.

>Many former bastions of evidence for human exceptionalism have not fared well: animals have been shown to remember things from the past, take action in the present to prepare for anticipated conditions, hold off on strong biological urges like hunger and lust until the time is right, and even perhaps metacognition, \[...] opting out of problems they recognize as harder to solve than the easier ones.

>One area where he sides with the skeptics is in asking for an end to inter-species intelligence contests and trying to grapple with big, messy topics like "self-awareness" or "consciousness". He points out that we don't even have good definitions for these concepts in humans, so why should we expect to apply them to other animals? Whatever "consciousness" might be, evidence of various things that have been associated with it have been shown in animals. At least among vertebrates, we have remarkably similar anatomical substrates, so, there is likely no bright line between "conscious" and "not conscious". And even if we could distinguish varying levels of consciousness, attempting to think of all cognition as one thing that proceeds on a scale from dumb to smart hides the truly interesting opportunities for experiment and observation that are available if we instead look at cognition as an adaptation made up of many components and specialized to the selective pressures that have shaped it in each species.

## Takeaways

>Besides the delightful stories about animals surprising researchers with how clever they can be (they really are a lot of fun), I found the biggest takeaway to be that cognition is not in a special class, and it shows the same evidence of conservation and continuity that you find everywhere else in evolved beings. Just as all vertebrate skeletons show a clear family resemblance, so too do vertebrate brains and nervous systems.

>I also had a few other takeaways about how to do science, the difficulties of sharing discoveries across disciplines, the continuity of neural anatomy, what we can learn from less closely-related brains, and what implications it might have for predictive processing theory.

### Lessons About Doing Science

>By the 2000s, the field had begun to reach a new balance with strengths taken from the previous currents in the field: the careful observation and intuition built on thousands of hours of attention to generate hypotheses, rigorously designed experiments to test them, and a solid evolutionary understanding of the animal, its anatomy, and its interplay with its environment.

> For example, it turns out that a surprising amount of useful data about animal cognition comes from experiments with dogs. \[...]  The main reason is because they will sit still for an fMRI to be the goodest boy (and to get hot dogs). Turns out sitting still for several minutes in a giant, whirring machine isn't something most animals (including chimps) are that into. So we use dogs.

>Paradoxically, a lot of the attempts to do what De Waal decries as misguided (measure comparative intelligence between species, establish a universal "theory of mind" and so forth) have given us some of the greatest insights. For example, Capuchin monkeys being tested on a facial recognition test did markedly worse on one day of the week, consistently. After some investigation, it was revealed to be because the researcher who worked that day was fidgety and made them nervous. Removing her got rid of the anomaly. Mice get so stressed out by the smell of male humans that their responses on cognitive tests are affected if a t-shirt worn by a man is left in the room. Doesn't happen with female researchers. Now think about all of the mouse behavioral experiments done for the past several decades and ponder how many had an all female team.

>My favorite in this category is the "Reverse Clever Hans" effect. You have probably heard of Clever Hans, the horse that could "count", who it turned out was just very good at spotting unconscious cues from his owner. It's a classic in psychology on the importance of careful experimental design. Well, a lot of human child/chimp comparison studies have run into the opposite problem. Human children, usually around the ages of 2-4, and chimps of various ages are asked to complete a variety of tasks and graded on how they do compared to each other. Chimps do pretty well on tool use comparisons, but human children _blow away_ the chimps on tests of social skills. What's going on? With the tools, the experimenter basically just shows the tools to the humans/chimps and lets them mess around. But the social skills being tested are how well the subjects follow the experimenter's cues or learn from others. Is this because humans are so much better at social skills than apes? Or might it be because they are following the cues of someone from the _same damn species_ and that the researchers are usually neutral, not well known, and do not engage in any friendly behavior with the chimps, but likely smile and encourage the human children? Where Clever Hans was given an unfair advantage by reading too much from a human, in a "Reverse Clever Hans" situation, humans compared with animals get all the benefits from reading the human and the animals do worse because they are relying on a human.

### Lots of Continuity (Especially Among Mammal Brains)

>Thanks in part to the fMRI studies of dogs mentioned above, we know that not only is a lot of brain anatomy common among mammals, it looks like it's turning on for roughly the same stuff. This means that a lot of what we learn about animal cognition and a lot of what we learn about human cognition can usefully be applied across species (with appropriate experiments to verify, of course). What I find most exciting about this is the fact that it opens up a much wider pool of data for our understanding of not only humans, but also all mammals (and to a lesser degree, all other vertebrates). Findings that might once have been relegated to an obscure animal behavior lab might be tremendously relevant to humans, but nobody bothered to look.

### Except Where There Isn't (Birds, Cephalopods)

> Birds and cephalopods are especially interesting for understanding cognition and intelligence precisely because they are smart with different hardware. Bird brains still make use of the familiar vertebrate architecture, but the optimization pressures of flight have caused them to have much lighter brains with more neurons per volume. So crows and parrots can be spooky smart despite having brain to body mass ratios that don't look so hot on first blush. Cephalopods are even weirder and harder to understand. They have a lot of their nervous system spread throughout their body, including a separate ganglion for each sucker, so they might have a _very_ different method of cognition. This difference is what makes them simultaneously potentially very valuable for exploring the full scope of cognition in the natural world, but also makes it hard to even come up with good experiments to figure out what's going on inside their rubbery, color-changing non-skulls.

## A Reminder of the Joy of Learning

>Much of the book is simply descriptions of remarkable experiments showing animals doing things that seem astonishing if you don't know them.

>Elephants can recognize different human languages and even the age and gender of humans - some Elephants know that young Maasai men sometimes stab them, so they flee from young male voices speaking Maasai, while ignoring women and children speaking Maasai, or young men speaking other languages

>Octopuses have good vision, but apparently don't much use it for hunting - they will ignore a tasty crayfish in a jar until the jar is smeared with fish juice, making it _smell_ like food, at which point they will promptly open the jar and eat the crayfish

>Capuchin monkeys seem to learn more from trial and error, whereas apes seem to show cause and effect thinking and when presented with the same challenge get it on the first try.
